Add "Translation Guide" to README (#514)
mjakeman/extension-manager: po/README.md

# Translating Extension Manager

## How to add new translation

1. You need software to translate Extension Manager. In this example, we will use [POEdit](https://poedit.net/).
2. Clone Extension Manager repository to your device. You can do this using command line. If you have configured git:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:mjakeman/extension-manager.git
```
Or you can click green button `Code`, then click `Download ZIP`, which will download repository inside of zip file.

Unpack it with archive manager.

3. You need `pot` file, that lies inside `./po` folder. Make sure, that [pot file is up-to-date](#regenerate-pot-files), before proceeding.
4. Open it with POEditor.
5. Click on button on bottom of window `Create a new translation`, select your desired language.
6. Press `Ctrl+S` to save new file, place it inside `./po` folder with filename that POEdit gave you.

> 7. Open `./po/LINGUAS` file with any text editor, and add there locale code of your language. For example, if you want to add Ukrainian translation, POEdit will suggest you filename `uk.po`, so in `LINGUAS` file, you need to add `uk`.

Author: Like this? [7a045d2](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager/pull/514/commits/7a045d2f8e528a97ac59f67f30496ce15da4ff4e)

> 7. Open `./po/LINGUAS` file with any text editor, and add there locale code of your language. For example, if you want to add Ukrainian translation, POEdit will suggest you filename `uk.po`, so in `LINGUAS` file, you need to add `uk`.

Reviewer: Yes, that works!

2. Always check your translation before opening pull request, don't just blindly translate.

3. Open your `po` file with any text editor, not with POEdit, and in top most of file you will find some placeholder info for your translation. Please, fill it, if you can. Take as example `uk.po` file.

4. `translator-credits` is optional and you not comfortable with sharing your alias or email or link, then leave it as-is. Also, if there will be credits for other translators, please, don't remove them. Just add your credit info on newline.

If you want to put email, do this:

`your_alias <somecooladress@mail.com>`

And if you want to place link:

`your_alias https://example.com`

You can check if you input everything correctly in `About` dialog of Extension Manager.

## Regenerate POT files
If you want to regenerate the `pot` file (i.e. when it hasn't been updated in
a while), there are a few steps that need to be followed:

GNOME Builder version:

1. Open GNOME builder.
2. Open `New Build Terminal` with `Shift+Ctrl+Alt+T` or click `plus button` in top-left corner and pick `New Build Terminal`
3. Go to `po` directory and run `print-source-files.sh`.

```bash
cd extension-manager/po

> ./print-source-files.sh
> ```
> 4. You will get output. Replace contents of `POTFILES` with that output.

Reviewer: I don't have a strong opinion here, but it might help to avoid some copy/paste errors.

```suggestion
./print-source-files.sh > POTFILES
```

Author: [e2b2a6a](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager/pull/514/commits/e2b2a6a07666ae78256afdbf091e102c3a73d369)

5. Go to the build directory (typically `_build`, but whichever you specified when running meson) and initialize it.

Like this:

```bash
cd extension-manager
mkdir ./_build
cd ./_build
meson
```

6. Now meson is initialized and you can re-generate `pot` file.

Like this:
```bash
meson compile extension-manager-pot
```

Without GNOME Builder:

1. Make sure that you have `meson` and `gettext` utilities installed on your system. Refer to your distribution package manager.
2. Go to `po` directory and run `print-source-files.sh`.

```bash
cd extension-manager/po
./print-source-files.sh
```

> 3. You will get output. Replace contents of `POTFILES` with that output.

Reviewer: Same as above.

Author: [e2b2a6a](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager/pull/514/commits/e2b2a6a07666ae78256afdbf091e102c3a73d369)

# Translating Extension Manager

> Translations contributions is always welcome!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Translations contributions are always welcome!
```

Author: Since I'm also not native speaker, I think, it would be good idea to wait for someone who speak English natively?
Should I apply suggestions now or wait?

> Translations contributions is always welcome!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contributions to translations are always welcome!
```

I think this flows a bit better

> If you totally new to GTK software transitioning or software development in general, fear not! Everything here explained as detailed, as possible!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are totally new to GTK software transitioning or software development in general, fear not! Everything here is explained as detailed, as possible!
```

> If you totally new to GTK software transitioning or software development in general, fear not! Everything here explained as detailed, as possible!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are totally new to GTK software translation (or software development in general), fear not! The entire process is explained below in as much detail as possible. If you have any trouble, please reach out on our matrix channel: [https://matrix.to/#/#extension-manager:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/#extension-manager:matrix.org).
```

Slight grammar changes and add help link

> If you are totally new to GTK software translation (or software development in general), fear not! The entire process is explained below in as much detail as possible. If you have any trouble, please [get in touch](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager#-community).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are totally new to GTK software translation (or software development in general), fear not! The entire process is explained below in as much detail as possible. If you have any trouble, please [get in touch](/README.md#-community).
```

> If you already have experience with translating GTK applications, remember that Extension Manager is written in C, so you need to rebuild it every time, when you do changes in `po` files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you already have experience with translating GTK applications, remember that Extension Manager is written in C. You will need to rebuild it every time you make a change to the `po` files.
```

## How to add new translation

1. You need software to translate Extension Manager (in this case, we will use [POEdit](https://poedit.net/)) and [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/) to build and test your translation.
2. Clone Extension Manager repository to your device.

* *Using git:*
```bash
git clone git@github.com:mjakeman/extension-manager.git
```

* *Using Github:*

1. Click green button `Code`.
2. In opened menu click `Download ZIP`.
3. Save it in your `~/` home folder.
4. Unpack archive with archive manager of your choice.
5. Rename folder that will be unpacked from archive to `extension-manager`.

* *Using GNOME Builder:*

1. Run GNOME Builder.

> 2. Click `Clone Repository` button on bottom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click `Clone Repository` button at the bottom.
```

3. In `Repository URL` paste: `https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager`
4. Set `Location` to `~/`

> Since later we will use GNOME Builder again, you can leave it opened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since later we will use GNOME Builder again, you can leave it open.
```

> Since later we will use GNOME Builder again, you can leave it opened.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can leave GNOME Builder open as we will use it again later.
```

Swap clause order -> a bit more natural

> 3. You need `pot` file, that lies inside `./po` folder. Make sure, that [pot file is up-to-date](#regenerate-pot-files), before proceeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. You need the `pot` file that lies inside `./po` folder. Make sure that the [pot file is up-to-date](#regenerate-pot-files) before proceeding.
```

4. Open it with POEditor.

> 5. Click on button on bottom of window `Create a new translation`, select your desired language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Click on button at the bottom of window `Create a new translation`, select your desired language.
```

6. Press `Ctrl+S` to save new file, place it inside `./po` folder with filename that POEdit gave you.
7. Open `./po/LINGUAS` file with any text editor, and add there locale code of your language. For example, if you want to add Ukrainian translation, POEdit will suggest you filename `uk.po`, so in `LINGUAS` file, you need to add `uk`. And, please, keep locale codes in alphabetical order.

> But sometimes, you might want to specify variant for your language. For example, for Russian in Russia Federation, you need to set locale to `ru_RU`, instead of just `ru`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But sometimes, you might want to specify a variant for your language. For example, for Russian in Russia Federation, you need to set locale to `ru_RU`, instead of just `ru`.
```

> More about locales you can learn [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/Locale-Names.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about locales [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/Locale-Names.html).
```

8. Translate Extension Manager!
9. [Test your translation](#how-to-test-translation).

## How to test translation

> After you finished translation, you might want to test it. The easiest way to do so, is to use [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you have finished your translation, you will want to test it. The easiest way to do so is to use [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/).
```

> If you choose to clone repository using GNOME Builder in [How to add new translation](#how-to-add-new-translation) and didn't closed GNOME Builder window, skip to step 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you choose to clone repository using GNOME Builder in [How to add new translation](#how-to-add-new-translation) and didn't close GNOME Builder window, skip to step 4.
```

> If you choose to clone repository using GNOME Builder in [How to add new translation](#how-to-add-new-translation) and didn't closed GNOME Builder window, skip to step 4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you chose to clone the repository using GNOME Builder in [How to add new translation](#how-to-add-new-translation) and have not closed the GNOME Builder window, skip to step 4.
```

> 1. If you didn't already installed [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/), install it now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you didn't already install [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/), install it now.
```

> 1. If you didn't already installed [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/), install it now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If you haven't already installed [GNOME Builder](https://apps.gnome.org/Builder/), install it now.
```

Author: Done with 4a34932487dee1c5acc1867a7968b3650a8dbce2

2. Open GNOME Builder.

> 3. Click on button on bottom of window `Select a Folder...` and pick folder with Extension Manager source [that we cloned before](#how-to-add-new-translation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on button at the bottom of window `Select a Folder...` and pick folder with Extension Manager source [that we cloned before](#how-to-add-new-translation).
```

4. In top-center, click on button with `triangle pointing down`.
5. In opened menu pick `Rebuild`.
6. Wait until you get `Build succeeded` in upper-center text box.
7. Click on button with `triangle pointing down` in upper-center.
8. In opened menu pick `Install`.
9. Open `New Runtime Terminal`.

With `Ctrl+Alt+T` shortcut or click `+` button in top-left corner and pick `New Runtime Terminal`.

10. In opened terminal, you need to force locale that you want to test. Usually, it will match locale name of your `po` file or it might require to specify your regional code. For example, to force application in Ukrainian language, you need to type:
```bash
LC_ALL=uk_UA.UTF-8
```
Where you need to replace `uk_UA` with your desired locale.

> More about locales you can learn [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/Locale-Names.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about locales [here](https://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/html_node/Locale-Names.html).
```

11. Run `extension-manager` to run Extension Manager, which would use locale that you want to test.

> Once you done some changes, you need to refresh application so it will apply changes to translation. To do so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have finished your changes, you need to refresh the application so it will apply changes to translation. To do so:
```

1. Stop current running Extension Manager with `Ctrl+C` in terminal or simply close Extension Manager window.
2. Then click on button on `top-center` with `triangle pointing down` in GNOME Builder.
3. In opened menu pick `Rebuild`.
4. Wait until GNOME Builder rebuild Extension Manager.
5. Now close this terminal with:
```bash
exit
```
Or just click `cross symbol` on tab with this terminal.

6. After that, repeat instructions from [How to test translation](#how-to-test-translation) section, starting from step 7.
Do this every time, when you do some changes to `po` file to see them in Extension Manager.

## How to update existing translation

> If you want update to update translation that someone else already did:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to update the translation that someone else already did:
```

1. Try to contact original translator. You might find their contact info in top of `po` file of translation that you want to update (if you will open it via any text editor) or in `translator-credits` and ask them about changes in translation.
2. If you can't contact them for some reasons or they don't respond, then just translate on your own.
3. [Re-generate pot file](#regenerate-pot-files).
4. Open `po` file that you want to update with POEditor.
5. In top menu click `Translation`, then `Update from POT file…`, and pick `pot` file that you re-generated earlier.
6. If you wish, don't forget to add yourself to `translator-credits` (*DON'T REMOVE PREVIOUS TRANSLATORS THERE*, just add your credit on newline) and in top of `po` file via text editor.
7. [Send pull request](#how-to-contribute-your-translation).

Try to be consistent with choices that previous translator did, unless they contradict other GTK/GNOME applications translated terms or you think that your translation will suit better.

## How to contribute your translation
If you think that you done with translating, it's time to send your translation as pull request to developers of Extension Manager!

> This part might be tricky to someone who not familiar with software development and Github, so if you don't understand something, you can contact [community/developers here](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager#-community), where you will get help!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This part might be tricky to someone who not familiar with software development and Github, so if you don't understand something, reach out to the developers/community on our matrix channel where you will get help! [https://matrix.to/#/#extension-manager:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/#extension-manager:matrix.org)
```

Let's push people towards using our matrix channel as it's more active

Reviewer 2: Ah thinking of the discussions tab instead of the README - ignore this one

1. Make sure, that you have account on [Github](https://github.com/). And if not, create one.

2. Also make sure, that you know some basics about how to make pull requests: [How to make pull request from fork](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request-from-a-fork) and [How to create fork](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/working-with-forks/about-forks).

3. Upload changes that you make in your local copy of repository to your Github fork.

If you already know how to use git, this can be done like this:
```bash
cd extension-manager
git commit -m "I translated Extension Manager!"
git push
```

If not, you could use Github interface to do so:

1. Open your fork on Github, navigate to `./po` folder.
2. Click `Add file` then `Upload files` and pick your translated `po` file and `LINGUAS` (in case if you added new translation. For updates to existing translation you don't need to send `LINGUAS`).

> 3. Make sure that everything correct, there no typos in translation, mistakes, you didn't upload wrong files by accident, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Make sure that everything is correct, there are no typos in translation, mistakes, you didn't upload wrong files by accident, etc.
```

4. Open [pull request](https://github.com/mjakeman/extension-manager/compare) to Extension Manager repository against your fork.

## Tips about translating
1. Try to be consistent in your translation with other GTK/GNOME applications.

Pick same terms, use same accelerators, etc.

2. Always test your translation before opening pull request.

3. Open your `po` file with any text editor, not with POEdit, and in top most of file you will find some placeholder info for your translation. Please, fill it, if you can. Take as example `uk.po` file.

> 4. `translator-credits` is optional and you not comfortable with sharing your alias or email or link, then leave it as-is. Also, if there will be credits for other translators, please, don't remove them. Just add your credit info on newline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. `translator-credits` is optional and if you are not comfortable with sharing your alias, email or link, then leave it as-is. Also, if there are credits for other translators, please, don't remove them. Just add your credit info on newline.
```
